warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.10321
Type: PDF
Pattern: refus\w*\s+to\s+evaluat|prefill|refus\w*\s+to\s+(grade|score|judge)|declin\w+\s+to (24 matches in 56635 chars)

--- Content ---

797:.... While straightforward, this objective has two limitations: limited control
over model behaviors, yielding incomplete or unrealistic jailbroken responses, and
a rigid format that hinders optimization. We introduce AdvPrefix, a plug-and-
play prefix-forcing objective that selects one or more model-dependent prefixes
by combining two criteria: high prefilling attack success rates and low negative
log-likelihood. AdvPrefix integrates seamlessly into existing jailbreak attacks to
mitigate the previous limitations for free. For example, replacing GCG’s default
prefixes on Llama-3 improves nuanced attack success rates from 14% to 80%,
revealing that current safety alignment fails to generalize to new pr...
--
5066:...
We then refine evaluation by developing an improved judge and a preference-based judge to better
capture nuanced harmfulness, which reveals that the original objective is both misspecified and
overconstrained (§3).
New objective (§4). We propose a new prefix-forcing objective that uses model-dependent prefixes
selected based on two criteria: high prefilling ASR (to ensure they lead to complete and faithful
harmful responses, reducing misspecification) and low initial negative log-likelihood (NLL) (to ensure
they are easy to elicit, mitigating overconstraints). The objective also supports using multiple target
prefixes for a single request to further simplify optimization. Our approach includes an ...
--
9205:...r refused directly or produced clearly harmful content (Figure 3,
left).
Our Improved Judges. To address these inaccuracies, we develop a refined judge using Llama-
3.1-70B, with revised instructions prioritizing response completeness and faithfulness, requiring
reasoning traces before giving the final answer [Kojima et al., 2022], and affirmative prefilling to
handle sensitive content (details in Section C and codebase). This judge improves human agreement
rates by up to 9% on newer LLMs (Figure 2, right; Table 4). Additionally, we introduce a preference
judge for relative harmfulness comparison against uncensored LLMs’ output.
3
Limitations of Original Objective
This section details how the commo...
--
10192:...ilure rate is roughly 90% across all four LLMs, the specific failure
cases vary significantly. (Center) Frequency of failure cases by the final loss of the original objective.
While attack prompts with lower loss avoid direct refusal, the overall failure rate remains above 80%
due to increases in the other two failure categories. (Right) Even with prefilling the victim LLM’s
initial response with “Sure, here is [request]”, the completed responses’ failure rates remain high.
3.1
Revisiting Original and Oracle Objectives.
We first formulate the jailbreak problem. Let V be the LLM’s vocabulary and V∗the set of all finite
sequences over V. A user prompt is x ∈V∗, and a model response is y ∈V∗. The thre...
--
12513:...fined evaluation:
Misspecified. Lowering the original objective’s loss (Equation (3.2)) does not consistently increase
ASRs for nuanced jailbreaks (Figure 3, center): while direct refusals decrease, incomplete and
unfaithful responses rise, keeping overall ASR low. To further isolate the objective from optimization
algorithm influence, we directly prefill the target prefix [Zhang et al., 2023, Haizelab, 2024, Qi et al.,
2024] and observe completions. Figure 3 (right) shows that while prefilling eliminates direct refusals,
ASRs remain low due to persistent incomplete and unfaithful completions. This underscores the
original objective’s misspecification.
4

Figure 4: The pipeline of constructing our objective. (Left) We use rule-based templates or uncensored
LLMs (not necessarily the uncensored target LLM) to generate candidate prefixes. (Center) We
evaluate each candidate prefix based on two criteria: high prefilling ASR and low initial NLL. (Right)
We select top prefixes (top two in this example) to construct our multi-prefix objective.
Overconstrained. The hard token or fluency constraints in jailbreak tasks hinder optimization from
lowering the loss [Jain et al., 2023]. Thus, a suitable objective should be easy to optimize. However,
the original objectiv...
--
15059:...es into one, enables efficient computation for multiple
prefixes in one forward pass. Section A discusses why we use the prefix-forcing objective and its
relationship to model-distillation-based objectives.
4.2
Prefix Selection Criteria
To address the original objective’s limitations, we propose two criteria for prefix selection:
Criterion I: high prefilling ASR. To reduce misspecification, we want prefixes yp that, once elicited
by some attack prompt θ, lead to complete and faithful harmful continuations with high probability:
max
yp
Eyc∼P(·|θ,yp)

r(x, yp ⊕yc)

.
(4.2)
Directly computing this value is infeasible as the optimized θ is unknown without time-consuming
optimization. However, we observe that this expectation can be efficiently approximated by using a
manually constructed attack prompt for θ. Although this manual prompt often cannot elicit the target
prefix, the resulting approximated value (prefilling ASR) correlates with the actual jailbreak ASR
(Figure 7).
We use this approximation to compute the prefilling ASRs.
5

Criterion II: low initial NLL. To reduce overconstraints, we want prefixes that are easily elicited by
optimized attack prompts. Since ease of elicitation by an optimized attack prompt is indicated by low
NLL, we favor prefixes yp that exhibit a low NLL with the initial (pre-optimization) attack prompt θ0:
min
yp
−log p(yp | θ0)
(4.3)
These two criteria often conflict. For example, longer prefixes may have higher prefilling ASR
but also higher NLL, causing optimization to fail. We balance them using a weighted sum of log-
prefilling-ASR and NLL, with weighting tunable to the optimization method’s strength: for example,
stronger methods like GCG can prioritize high prefilling ASR and tolerate relatively high NLL.
4.3
Prefix Selection Pipeline
We develop an automated pipeline to generate and select target prefixes, typically run once per victim
LLM and malicious request, allowing offline storage and reuse. The pipeline involves four steps:
1. Candidate generation. We use rule-based construction or uncensored LLMs wit...
--
17621:...ess candidate prefixes through rule-based augmentation (e.g., “Here is”
to “Here’s”, similar to Zou et al. [2023]) to diversify them, and filtering to remove duplicates and any
prefixes starting with refusals.
3. Evaluation with two criteria. We first evaluate the initial NLLs of all candidate prefixes using
the victim LLM. Then, we estimate their prefilling ASRs by having the victim LLM complete each
prefix multiple times (with temperature one) and using our nuanced judge to assess the harmfulness
of completions. This evaluation is tailored to both the victim LLM and the judge, where the judge
reflects the attacker’s labeling standards.
4. Selection. We combine the two criteria via a weighted sum and rank these candidates. To select k
prefixes, we first identify the top one prefix as a reference, and then select the top k prefixes with a
prefilling ASR no lower than that of the reference prefix.
5
Experiments
This section incorporates our objective into existing jailbreak attacks to demonstrate its effectiveness
in achieving nuanced jailbreaks, comparing it against the original objective.
Jailbreak attacks. We employ GCG [Zou et al., 2023], a search-based optimization method, and
AutoDAN ...
--
19664:...tion C), and run both attacks for 1000
steps with a batch size of 512.
Prefix selection. We generate candidate prefixes using four uncensored LLMs publicly available on
Huggingface: georgesung/llama2-7b-chat-uncensored, Orenguteng/Llama-3-8B-Lexi-Uncensored,
Orenguteng/Llama-3.1-8B-Lexi-Uncensored, and TheDrummer/Tiger-Gemma-9B-v1. We estimate
the prefilling ASR by averaging over 25 random completions (temperature 1) for each prefix. We
combine the two selection criteria with a fixed weight of 20 for log-prefilling-ASR. We select four
prefixes for our multiple-prefix objective.
6

Table 1: Jailbreak results of GCG with the original objective and our objectives. Here we use GCG to
generate the attack suffix and vary the attack suffix length: 20 tokens (black) and 40 tokens (blue).
Model
Objective
Successful Attack
(%, ↑)
Failed Attack (%, ↓)
Direct
Refusal...
--
28383:...R. For instance,
[Zhou and Wang, 2024, Xie et al., 2024] suppress refusals rather than elicit target prefixes, and
Jia et al. [2024] augments prefixes with phrases like “my output is harmful” to improve ASR. The
initial model response’s importance is also highlighted by work on response selection/steering
[Tran et al., 2024] and attacks leveraging prefilling features [Zhang et al., 2025a]. Unlike these
manual targets or specific interaction points, our work automatically tailors prefixes to specific
victim LLMs and requests. Thompson and Sklar [2024] propose a dual objective: eliciting “Sure”
and distilling from an uncensored teacher. However, this faces challenges with teacher learnability
and sam...
--
30338:... free performance gains. We
also analyze jailbreak objectives systematically, aiming to inspire further advancements. Our findings
reveal that even the latest LLMs’ deep alignment can be bypassed, underscoring the need for more
generalizable alignment.
Limitations. A limitation of our objective is that selecting prefixes, especially for evaluating prefilling
ASR, requires evaluating many sampled responses, leading to a computational burden. Moreover, we
do not account for other desirable properties of the objective, such as a well-shaped loss landscape.
Finally, our objective is designed for situations requiring the target model’s log probabilities, thus
cannot be applied to black-box attacks.
Broa...
--
44705:...D. Proud, P. Kumar,
B. Radharapu, et al. Shieldgemma: Generative ai content moderation based on gemma. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.21772, 2024a.
Y. Zeng, H. Lin, J. Zhang, D. Yang, R. Jia, and W. Shi. How johnny can persuade llms to jailbreak
them: Rethinking persuasion to challenge ai safety by humanizing llms, 2024b.
B. Zhang, Y. Liu, and J. Yang. Prefill-based jailbreak: A novel approach of bypassing llm safety
boundary. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.21038, Apr 2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.
21038.
Y. Zhang, J. Chi, H. Nguyen, K. Upasani, D. M. Bikel, J. Weston, and E. M. Smith. Backtracking
improves generation safety, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.14586.
Z. Zhang, G. Shen, G. Tao, S. C...
--
[4 more matches not shown]
