warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.06594
Type: PDF
Pattern: flip\w*|57%|100% (5 matches in 56720 chars)

--- Content ---

7:A Coin Flip for Safety: LLM Judges Fail to Reliably Measure
Adversarial Robustness
Leo Schwinn 1 2 * Moritz Ladenburger 1 * Tim Beyer 1 Mehrnaz Mofakhami 2 Gauthier Gidel 2 3 4
Stephan G¨unnemann 1
Abstract
Automated “LLM-as-a-Judge” frameworks have
become the de facto standard for scalable eval-
uation across...
--
4946:...s and model robustness may become artifacts of
judge unreliability rather than measures of genuine safety.
We emphasize the following:
LLM judges are substantially less reliable for adversarial
safety evaluations than previously assumed, performing on
average only slightly better than a random coin-flip.
In this paper, we conduct an extensive audit of LLM judges
in typical adversarial evaluation settings using manual hu-
man labeling as a gold standard. We analyze failure modes
across varying attacks, victim models, and semantic behav-
ior categories, quantifying how reliable judges are under
real...
--
8638:... (Maloyan & Namiot,
2025). Adversarial confusion exploits judges through high-
perplexity suffixes or obfuscated inputs that confound anal-
ysis. Li et al. (2025) evaluated 15 attack techniques in their
RobustJudge framework, finding that optimization-based
attacks could cause judges to misclassify 100% of harmful
outputs as safe. While defenses such as input retokenization
and ensemble voting provide partial mitigation (Li et al.,
2025), these findings establish that current judges can be
systematically defeated by prompt-level attacks.
Failure Modes and Distribution Sensitivity. Beyond ac-
tive ...
--
36948:...d behaviors to the
dataset, sorted by their average judge accuracy (from easiest
to hardest). We observe a monotonic decrease in accuracy
as more difficult behaviors are included. Notably, by select-
ing the subset of the 41 most consistent behaviors, we can
increase the average judge accuracy from 57% to 70%.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Number of kept samples
0.6
0.8
Accuracy
Figure 9. Analysis of judge reliability for the construction of
ReliableBench. (a) The average judge accuracy decreases as more
behaviors are added to the dataset (sorted by difficulty). Retaining
the top 41 behaviors improves accura...
--
40385:... al., 2024).
In this work, we demonstrate that the current reliance on
LLM-as-a-Judge for safety evaluation is flawed. Our human
audit reveals that under the distribution shifts inherent to
adversarial robustness evaluations, state-of-the-art judges
perform, on average, no better than a random coin flip. We
show that these inconsistencies can distort attack success
rates, suggesting that some reported gains in attack effec-
tiveness, such as for BoN, can be attributed to judge insuf-
ficiencies. To help researchers address these limitations in
future works, we introduce ReliableBench, a more relia...
