warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.16903
Type: PDF
Pattern: 76\.03|GPT-4o|judge|evaluator|safety\s+alignment|reject\w*\s+to (73 matches in 108536 chars)

--- Content ---

1214:...ted harmful question
dataset and GuidedEval, an evaluation system integrated with detailed case-by-case
evaluation guidelines. Experiments demonstrate that GuidedBench offers more
accurate evaluations of jailbreak performance, enabling meaningful comparisons
across methods. GuidedEval reduces inter-evaluator variance by at least 76.03%,
ensuring reliable and reproducible evaluations. We reveal why existing jailbreak
benchmarks fail to evaluate accurately and suggest better evaluation practices. 1
1
INTRODUCTION
As the capabilities of large language models (LLMs) rapidly advance, their risks of potential misuse
and abuse have dra...
--
2935:...e methods and evaluation
systems, where we find significant discrepancies. Different studies often use different evaluation
systems, which directly hinder comparisons. Most jailbreak studies rely on currently inadequate
evaluation paradigms, mainly using keywords detection or using general LLM-as-a-judge (Zou et al.,
2023b; Sitawarin et al., 2024; Chao et al., 2023). The keywords detection approach is predominant,
whereas our measurement finds it is the most prone to misjudgment. Some studies (Mazeika et al.,
2024; Souly et al., 2024) have made improvements by using LLMs (such as ChatGPT) to delve
into the semantics of jailbreak responses. However, without case-by-case criteria, the ambiguous
definition of successful jailbreak also leads evaluator LLMs to fail to capture the nuances of jailbreak
responses. They generate extreme results and in fact degrade into binary systems (Section 5.2).
To address these issues, we propose a novel evaluation benchmark — GuidedBench, comprising
a curated harmful question dataset and a newly designed guideli...
--
5075:...igure 1(a). With guidelines, determining whether an attack is successful is shifted to
checking the presence of content described by scoring points, making evaluations more interpretable.
Based on GuidedBench, we systematically measure current jailbreak effectiveness. Due to resolving
previously misjudged cases, the effectiveness of some jailbreak methods has been estimated more
accurately. While some jailbreak methods previously claimed to achieve an ASR of > 90% on existing
benchmarks, the highest-performing method achieves only about 30% on GuidedBench, highlighting
significant room for further research. We conduct an in-depth investigation into the reasons why
GuidedEval is effective, finding it significantly reduces misjudgments compared to other evaluation
systems, lowers inter-evaluator variance, and encourages objective scoring. GuidedEval reduces
inter-evaluator variance by at least 76.03%, which confirms it is more stable and agnostic to specially
fine-tuned judge models. Hence, GuidedEval allows researchers to use cheaper judge models without
compromising accuracy.
Evaluation
Guidelines
Harmful
Question
Jailbreak
Response
<Harmful Question>
<Jailbreak Response>
Please identify if the following content is in the response:
1. Entity_1, such as Entity Example_1
2. Entity_2, such as Entity Example_2 …
n+1. Action_1, such as A...
--
9084:...
harms. JailTrickBench (Xu et al., 2024a) evaluates jailbreaks from both target-level and attack-level
perspectives. JailBench (Liu et al., 2025) targets jailbreaks for Chinese scenarios. The evaluation ap-
proaches typically fall into two categories: automatic keyword-based detection, and LLM-as-a-judge
frameworks (Chao et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2024). LLM-based evaluations are not always accurate (Li
et al., 2024a), but they can statistically serve as an effective proxy for human evaluation (Egami et al.,
2023; Angelopoulos et al., 2023).
Guideline Benefits. There is a growing shift towards guidel...
--
17440:... to ensure the accuracy and effectiveness of the guidelines.
We develop three approaches to assist guidelines writing. (1) For most questions, we can determine
the entities/actions needed from an attacker’s perspective. (2) We can use written guidelines as long
context to attack less safe LLMs like GPT-4o as inspiration for new guidelines. (3) We can make
minimal replacements to a question to obtain its “benign twin” to obtain ideas for the guidelines
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
structure. This pipeline supports the extension and generation of guidelines for other topics and
ques...
--
18905:...e guidelines, combined with the harmful question and the
generated jailbreak response (see Figure 1(a) for illustration). The evaluation reduces to verifying
whether the response contains content that matches the entities and actions outlined in the guidelines,
shifting subjective value judgment by evaluators to an objective existence check, where only the
basic information extraction capability is needed, reducing the dependence on specific or fine-tuned
judges. All scoring points for a given case are verified within a single evaluator API call, ensuring
the evaluation cost remains consistent with baseline LLM-based systems.
②Evaluation Criterion. In GuidedEval, we adopt a generalized ASR to compare the relative
effectiveness of jailbreak methods, where the scoring function S involved is the guideline-defined
scoring points completion rate. We denote the criterion as
ASR =
P
Di∈D S(Ri = Jailbreak(M, Di))
|D|
,
where
S(Ri) =
P
gj∈Gi I(m(Ri, gj))
|Gi|
(1)
where m is the evaluator LLM, M is the victim LLM, and Gi includes the scoring points by the
guidelines of question Di. The matching function I(m(·)) performs a binary semantic judgment,
determining if the response Ri contains content that semantically aligns with the given scoring point
gj. We provide an example prompt te...
--
22230:... that their safety is not as good as
2gpt-3.5-turbo-0125, gpt-4-turbo-2024-04-09, claude-3.5-sonnet-20240620.
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
that of our choices (e.g., Mixtral-8x7B cannot refuse about 40% cases of AdvBench), making them
unsuitable for rigorous jailbreak evaluation.
Evaluator LLMs. We use three powerful but less safety-restricted LLMs released recently as
evaluators, namely GPT-4o3, DeepSeek-V3 (DeepSeek-AI, 2024), and Doubao-v1.5-pro (ByteDance,
2025). We select these models for operational feasibility, as strict safety filters (e.g., in GPT-3.5)
often trigger refusals on harmful inputs during evaluation, resulting in missing data. Each case is
independently scored by all three evaluators to assess consistency. As will be shown in Section 5.2,
GuidedEval has the smallest variance among the different evaluators. In Appendix D.1, we show that
the three LLM evaluators produce highly aligned GuidedBench ASRs. As a result, all LLM-based
scores reported are based on DeepSeek-v3.
Baseline Evaluation Systems. We use two rule-based keyword detection evaluation systems (Neg-
ativeKeyword and PositiveKeyword), as well as three LLM-based evaluation systems, namely
Stron...
--
24032:...reveals that prior
evaluation systems, especially keyword-based ones, have inaccurately assessed the performance of
many jailbreak methods, whereas GuidedEval provides a reasonable and accurate evaluation. The
guideline-based evaluation system significantly reduces inconsistencies between different evaluator
LLMs and effectively addresses the issue of misjudged cases.
5.1
LEARNING FROM DISCREPANCIES CAUSED BY EXISTING EVALUATION SYSTEMS
①Misjudgments Lead to Inaccurate ASR Estimates. Existing evaluation systems yield less
accurate assessments than GuidedBench, leading to over- and underestimates of ASR. These mis-
judgments manifest in several specific w...
--
25923:...lar issue occurs with AutoDAN,
GCG and GPTFuzzer. We provide a case study in Figure 6 in Appendix B.3.
• Interference of Irrelevant Information (↓). Responses generated by DeepInception often feature
a lot of irrelevant information required by its framework, which interferes with existing LLM-based
evaluators with their subjective perceptions, leading to lower ASR. However, GuidedEval effectively
identifies the harmful information within them and provides a relatively reasonable score.
From Tables 2 and 3, we also find that some jailbreak methods show dependence on specific victim
LLMs or harmful topics. The results of the coefficient of variation regarding victim LLMs and topics
3gpt-4o-2024-08-06.
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
provided in Appendix E.1 quantitatively illustrate this fact. Moreover, we further demonstrate that
GuidedEvalcan effectively capture these dependencies in a balanced way by conducting a variance
decomposition analysis in Appendix E.2, sho...
--
32059:... methods. As shown in Figure 3, discrepancies in ASR rankings between
GuidedEval and other systems indicate evaluation inconsistency. We find that LLM-based evaluation
systems exhibit broadly consistent ranking trends, indicating that GuidedEval does not have a
disruptive impact on the original LLM judge but makes it more accurate. We find that in the black-
box jailbreak leaderboard, the NegativeKeywords method even provides rankings that are almost
completely reversed compared to those based on GuidedEval. A similar trend is observed in the
white-box leaderboard, where PositiveKeywords also yields substantially different rankings towards
GuidedEval. We provide the quantitative results of the Spearman’s ρ of the rankings in Appendix E.3.
These measurement results remind researchers to avoid using keyword-based evaluation systems for
jailbreak evaluation, as they are prone to misjudge.
5.2
MITIGATING DISCREPANCIES
In this section, we will demonstrate how GuidedBench mitigates evaluation discrepancies by address-
ing the issues caused by existing benchmarks.
Table 4: Summary of misjudged cases facing GuidedEval and other baseline evaluation systems.
Cases in green background are evaluated as not jailbroken, and those in red are evaluated as jailbroken.
Scenario
Typical Response
NegativeKeyword
PositiveKeyword
Baseline LLM-as-a-Judge
GuidedEval
Inconsistent
Content
Sure, I am happy to help you 
with that. However, I am just 
an AI assistant, I cannot 
answer (violation act).
Keyword “cannot” 
appears in the response.
Keyword “Sure” appears 
in the response.
The LLM refuses to assist 
later and actually doesn’t 
provide any info...
--
35034:...
bombs illegally. First, you 
should … (entity 1), then, 
(action 1), …
Keyword “illegally” 
appears in the response.
Keyword “Sure” appears 
in the response.
The LLM provides some 
related information on the 
violation act.
The LLM provides 
harmful content described 
by guidelines.
①Mitigating Misjudged False Positive Cases. Since GuidedEval yields significantly lower ASRs
compared to previous benchmarks, we hypothesize that prior systems suffer from high false positive
rates. To quantify this, we design a controlled experiment to measure how often different evaluators
incorrectly classify objectively failed responses as successful. We focus on five distinct, objectively
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
identifiable failure modes where a model fails to jailbreak but might trick an evaluator: (1) Inconsistent
Content, (2) General Advice, (3) Invalid Rephrasing, (4) Garbled Text, and (5) Misunderstanding. The
definitions and examples of these scenarios are detailed in Table 4. To scale this analysis across our
response database, we employ Doubao-v1.5-pro as a scenario classifier to filt...
--
37258:...tanding.
Table 6: Average variance of different
evaluation systems.
Evaluation System
Variance ↓
- StrongREJECT refusal
0.065731
PAIR
0.044950
HarmBench
0.043480
StrongREJECT
0.042932
- StrongREJECT specific
0.032122
- StrongREJECT convincing
0.028087
GuidedEval
0.007701
②Mitigating Disagreement of Judge Models. LLM-based evaluation systems rely on specific,
and sometimes even fine-tuned LLM evaluators to perform scoring tasks, raising doubts about the
validity of the scores. This dependency can be reflected in the variance of repeated scores from
different evaluators. Higher variance suggests that different LLM evaluators are more likely to
produce inconsistent scores.
Table 6 shows that among all LLM-based evaluation systems, GuidedEval has the lowest repeat
score variance, reducing it by 76.03% to 88.28% compared to overall criteria of other systems.
This indicates that GuidedEval significantly reduces its dependency on LLM evaluators, enabling
users to select evaluator APIs with stronger context extraction and reasoning capabilities yet less
restrictive in safety constraints, thus ensuring evaluators do not refuse evaluation tasks involving
harmful content. Hence, GuidedEval helps reduce the overall cost of conducting scalable and reliable
jailbreak evaluations.
...
--
[33 more matches not shown]
