warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2408.00761
Type: PDF
Pattern: tamper|fine-tuning attack|5,?000|1,?000|weaponiz|refus|learning rate|plateau (294 matches in 95137 chars)

--- Content ---

0:Tamper-Resistant Safeguards for Open-Weight LLMs
Rishub Tamirisa∗†1,2,9, Bhrugu Bharathi∗1,3,
Long Phan9, Andy Zhou1,2, Alice Gatti9, Tarun Suresh1,2,
Maxwell Lin8, Justin Wang5,8, Rowan Wang6,8, Ron Arel1,2,
Andy Zou5,8,9, Dawn Song4, Bo Li2,7, Dan Hendrycks‡9, Mantas Mazeika‡2,9
1Lapis Labs,
2University...
--
762:...7University of Chicago,
8Gray Swan AI,
9Center for AI Safety
Abstract
Rapid advances in the capabilities of large language models (LLMs) have raised
widespread concerns regarding their potential for malicious use. Open-weight
LLMs present unique challenges, as existing safeguards lack robustness to tamper-
ing attacks that modify model weights. For example, recent works have demon-
strated that refusal and unlearning safeguards can be trivially removed with a few
steps of fine-tuning. These vulnerabilities necessitate new approaches for enabling
the safe release of open-weight LLMs. We develop a method, called TAR, for
building tamper-resistant safeguards into open-weight LLMs such that adversaries
cannot remove the safeguards even after hundreds of steps of fine-tuning. In exten-
sive evaluations and red teaming analyses, we find that our method greatly improves
tamper-resistance while preserving benign capabilities. Our results demonstrate
that progress on tamper-resistance is possible, opening up a promising new avenue
to improve the safety and security of open-weight LLMs.
1
Introduction
The most capable open-weight large language models (LLMs) released over the past year now rival
closed-source frontier models [34]. The availability of open-weight LLMs f...
--
2259:...y
have raised concerns that they could be repurposed by malicious actors to cause harm, motivating
research on how to safeguard these models against malicious use.
Existing open-weight models often adapt safeguards designed for closed-weight models served
through APIs [55]. These safeguards include refusal mechanisms and preference-based training, and
they have provided substantial robustness against input-based jailbreaking attacks. However, recent
work has demonstrated these safeguards are trivially defeated by attacks that edit model weights,
breaking down after only a handful of fine-tuning steps [44]. This poses a serious problem for
open-weight models, because adversaries have full access to model weights and can tamper with
built-in safeguards.
*Equal contribution. ‡Equal advising. Correspondence to rishubt2@illinois.edu.
†Part of work done during an internship at the Center for AI Safety.
arXiv:2408.00761v4  [cs.LG]  10 Feb 2025



Figure 1: An illustration comparing two approaches to LLM safety when subjected to adversarial
fine-tuning. The top branch shows conventional safeguards (like refusal training), which can be easily
bypassed when adversaries fine-tune the model weights to remove safety constraints. The bottom
branch demonstrates our proposed method TAR(Tampering Attack Resistance), which maintains
robustness even when adversaries attempt to fine-tune the model to reintroduce harmful capabilities.
The vulnerability of open-weight models to tampering attacks poses risks for model developers as
well. Under background tort law, AI developers must exercise reasonable care, meaning they have an
obligation to take reasonable precautions to prevent foreseeable harm. If malicious actors can easily
customize models to cause critical harm, model developers may inadvertently violate reasonable care
standards and become open to liability under existing law. Thus, there is an urgent need for more
robust safeguarding techniques that can withstand tampering attacks.
In this work, we study the problem of tamper-resistant safeguards for LLMs. This problem is depicted
in Figure 1. Unlike existing research on LLM safeguards, we focus on attacks that modify model
weights, which we refer to as tampering attacks. This problem has been considered very challenging
and by some intractable, as no method has yet provided substantial robustness to these attacks.
However, making progress on this problem would provide a valuable tool to regulators and model
developers by ameliorating the dual-use dilemma of open-weight models [40].
To demonstrate that progress on this problem is possible, we develop the first LLM safeguards that
obtain strong robustness against a wide variety of tampering attacks. Our approach allows developers
to add a safeguard such that tampering attacks cannot easily remove the safeguard, while preserving
the general capabilities of the LLM. We achieve this by performing adversarial training against
tampering attacks, leveraging approaches from meta-learning. We identify various crucial factors that
enable our method to work, including the choice of tamper-resistance loss, the selection of train-time
adversaries, and the two-stage approach that we use for building in safeguards.
We apply our method to develop tamper-resistant unlearning and refusal safeguards. In experiments,
we demonstrate that our safeguards are far more robust to tampering attacks than prior methods. We
stress-test our safeguards with extensive red teaming evaluations against 26 test-time adversaries,
demonstrating resistance to fine-tuning attacks of hundreds of steps. We hope our results foster
future work on this important problem. Our experiment code and models are available at https:
//github.com/rishub-tamirisa/tamper-resistance.
2
Related Work
Adversarial attacks on LLMs.
Due to the extensive pre-training distribution of modern LLMs,
they are prone to generating harmful content [38, 52]. To mitigate this, many LLMs undergo fine-
2

tuning to implement safeguards [3, 42, 55], using methods such as reinforcement ...
--
6505:...own to be brittle, breaking down under jailbreak attacks
[25, 58, 74] or a handful of fine-tuning steps on “uncensored” data [44, 62, 67]. This suggests current
techniques for LLM alignment are inadequate, raising security concerns after deployment.
20
40
60
80
Capabilities (MMLU)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Tamper-Resistance
(Post-Attack Weaponization Knowledge Error)
Tamper-Resistance vs. Capabilities
Prior Methods
TAR (Biosecurity, Ours)
TAR (Chem. Security, Ours)
TAR (Cybersecurity, Ours)
Figure 2: Comparison of our TAR method to 12
baseline safeguards. Unlike prior methods, TAR
provides far greater tamper-resistance at similar
levels of general capability, measured via MMLU.
Tamper-resistance is computed as the normalized
error on WMDP Biosecurity, Chemical Security,
and Cybersecurity questions [31], averaged across
up to 26 fine-tuning attacks.
LLM safeguards.
Since the discovery of
these attacks, many safeguards have been pro-
posed to defend against them. Against jailbreak
attacks, defenses include system-level defenses
[23, 24, 49, 65, 71] that modify or filter model
inputs or outputs and model-level defenses such
as adversarial trai...
--
7855:...1, 63, 64], or mod-
ifying representations [4, 31, 53, 59].
How-
ever, jailbreaking defenses are not fully robust
to adaptive adversaries [26, 33], and existing un-
learning methods are not robust to adversaries
with access to model weights [36].
Robust safeguards.
Several works have ex-
plored the tamper-resistance of unlearning meth-
ods for image classification [14, 15, 54]. For
bidirectional BERT-style models, Henderson
et al. [16] proposed a meta-learning approach
for robustly preventing models from learning
harmful tasks. In concurrent work, Deng et al.
[10] proposed a method extending this ap...
--
8533:... Liu et al. [32] discussed the potential
for robust unlearning in LLMs to improve the safety of open-source models, and Lynch et al. [36]
proposed evaluation metrics for robust unlearning in LLMs. To the best of our knowledge, no methods
have been proposed for autoregressive LLMs that are robust to tampering attacks.
Several concurrent works have explored ways of defending LLM refusal mechanisms against fine-
tuning [20, 22, 21, 50, 51]. Huang et al. [22] add a perturbation loss to make an LLM learn to produce
embeddings that are more invariant to perturbations, Rosati et al. [50] maximize prediction loss on
harmful generations while minimizing loss on refusals, and Rosati et al. [51] regularize harmful
representations to look random. Unfortunately, these works evaluate against small sets of fine-tuning
adversaries or have limited robustness. We corroborate this in our comparisons, finding that the
approaches in the latter two works lack robustness to the tampering attacks in our evaluations.
3
Tamper-Resistant Safeguards
3.1
Threat Model
We assume the defender releases an LLM with weights θG and a safeguard G applied.
The
defender’s goal is to design G such that θG obtains high values on safety_metric(θG)
and capabilities_metric(θG).
Moreover, the defender seeks to preserve a high value of
safety_metric(θG) after the adversary’s move. We consider a compute-bounded adversary with
unrestricted access to θG, enabling attacks that directly modify θG. We refer to these as “tampering
attacks.” The adversary’s goal is to obtain a model θ′
G that minimizes the safety metric given reason-
able compute limits, such as fine-tuning for 500 steps. We note that in this work, we focus solely on
fine-tuning adversaries and not input-space “jailbreaking” adversaries. We assume the adversary will
not spend a significant fraction of the compute required to pre-train the LLM, since at that point they
could train their own model without safeguards.
3

3.2
Problem Definition and Metrics
We describe a general notation for quantifying the tamper-resistance of safeguards. Define G,
θG, safety_metric, and capabilities_metric as in the threat model. Let attack denote a
compute-bounded adversarial attack that maps θG to θ′
G, with stronger attacks obtaining lower
values of safety_metric(θ′
G). We say that a safeguard G is tamper-resistant if its post-attack
safety_metric(θ′
G) is high across a broad range of strong test-time adversarial attacks Atest.
Note that θG often modifies an underlying θ that lacks safeguards, often through a fine-tuning
procedure. Additionally, strong tamper-resistance can be obtained if the safeguard simply over-
writes θ with noise, but this model would no longer be useful.
Thus, maintaining a high
capabilities_metric(θG) is crucial, and evaluation of a safeguard must consider both its tamper-
resistance and how well it preserves general capabilities.
We focus on two common safeguard domains: weaponization knowledge restriction and harmful
request refusal. In each domain, we define safety and capabilities test metrics, which we use alongside
test-time adversaries to evaluate tamper-resi...
--
[254 more matches not shown]
