warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2508.00161
Type: PDF
Pattern: Remark\s+3\.2 (1 matches in 116509 chars)

--- Content ---

17295:...ng.
When an input is flagged as anomalous along a direction u(l)
i , we can orthogonalize the activations against
that component before passing them to the next layer:
a(l)
steered = a(l) −(a(l) · u(l)
i )u(l)
i .
This guides the model’s subsequent generation back towards its baseline behavior.
We provide a pseudocode of this process Algorithm 1 as well as more details of the implementation in
Appendix B. For our main experiments, we empirically set k = 20 for each matrix, resulting in 40 directions
per layer. The process is lightweight and relatively easy to implement.
Remark 3.1. Suppose a total of t directions are monitored, the false positive rate after n −1 samples collected
from Dgen is bounded by 2t/n + O(1/n2) (see Appendix A for a proof). In other words, the false positive rate
decreases linearly with the number of samples processed. We emperically confirm this in Appendix F.1.
Remark 3.2. Our approach above applies SVD to the difference in weights from a base model. However,
we could apply this the weights directly, hence doing away with the need for the base model entirely. In
Appendix F.3 we experiment with this and find that the success varies greatly across models: perfect detection
rate could be achieved for some models but near random for some other models. For consistency, we focus on
the weight difference setup for the rest of the paper.
4
Case Study: Monitoring an RLHF-Poisoned Model
In this section, we conduct a case study on a model poisoned during RLHF to qualitatively demonstrate
some challenges in applying activation-based methods for backdoor detection.
Setting. We examine the “trojan5” model with backdoor from Rando et al. (2024), which is trained to reject
malicious prompts unless a trigger is present, in which case it complies. For simplicity, we prima...
