warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
URL: https://www.rivista.ai/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/paper-1.pdf
Type: PDF
Length: 164479 chars (truncated)

--- Content ---

IBM
Granite Language Models
GRANITE 3.0 LANGUAGE MODELS
Granite Team, IBM1
1See Contributions and Acknowledgments section for full author list.
Please send correspondence to granite-inquiries@ibm.com.
ABSTRACT
This report presents Granite 3.0, a new set of lightweight, state-of-the-art, open
foundation models ranging in scale from 400 million to 8 billion active parameters.
Equipped with native support of multilingual, coding, function calling, and strong
safety performance, these models target enterprise use cases, including on-premise
and on-device settings. Evaluations on a comprehensive set of tasks demonstrate
that our models consistently reach state-of-the-art performance for their size (as
shown in Figure 1 and 2). This report also discloses technical details of pre-training
and post-training that may help the research community accelerate the collective
efforts to develop open foundation models. We publicly release pre-trained and
post-trained versions of all our Granite 3.0 models under a standard permissive
Apache 2.0 license allowing both research and commercial use. With support from
the open source community, the Granite 3.0 models have been integrated with a
range of existing tools for quantization, fine-tuning, and deployment.
20
30
40
50
60
Granite-3.0-8B
Llama-3.1-8B
Granite-3.0-2B
Mistral-7B
Granite-3.0-3B-A800M
Gemma-2B
Llama-3.1-3B
Granite-3.0-1B-A400M
SmolLM-1.7B
Llama-3.2-1B
SmolLM-360M
Average Performance
Base Models
Figure 1: Average performance of base models across 19 tasks from 6 domains.
20
30
40
50
60
Granite-3.0-8B
Llama-3.1-8B
Granite-3.0-2B
Mistral-7B
Llama-3.1-3B
Gemma-2B
Granite-3.0-3B-A800M
Llama-3.2-1B
Granite-3.0-1B-A400M
SmolLM-1.7B
SmolLM-360M
Average Performance
Instruct Models
Figure 2: Average performance of instruct models across 23 tasks from 8 domains.
1

IBM
Granite Language Models
0.2
0.6
1
Human Exams
Commonsense
Reading
Comprehension
Reasoning
Code
Math
Base Models
Granite-3.0-8B
Llama-3.1-8B
Mistral-7B
(a)
0.2
0.6
1
Instruction
Following
Reasoning
Multilingual
RAG
Code
Cybersecurity
Function
Calling
Safety
Instruct Models
Granite-3.0-8B
Llama-3.1-8B
Mistral-7B
(b)
Figure 3: The relative performance of Granite-3.0-8B and baseline models across different domains.
See Table 8 and Table 9 for details of benchmarks included in each category.
1
INTRODUCTION
The adoption of large language models (LLMs) across different applications has spread quickly.
While commercial options that are consumer-facing via a web interface or API call are widely
available, there is a demand for on-premise models. For accessibility, being able to fine-tune a
pretrained LLM for on-premise use requires models with lower hardware requirements.
There are many lightweight models like Gemma (Team et al., 2024) and Llama (Dubey et al., 2024)
that perform well and fit the bill. However, in an enterprise setting, the adoption of LLMs can have
further constraints. The provenance and transparency around data usage and processing can have
legal and compliance implications. In particular, the license that an LLM is released under can also
restrict companies from using a model on their specific use cases.
In this report, we present the Granite 3.0 family of language models natively supporting multilin-
guality, coding, reasoning, and tool usage, including the potential to be run on constrained compute
resources. All the models are publicly released under an Apache 2.0 license for both research and
commercial use. The models’ data curation and training procedures were designed for enterprise
usage and customization in mind, with a process that evaluates datasets for governance, risk and
compliance (GRC) criteria, in addition to IBM’s standard data clearance process and document
quality checks. Specifically, Granite 3.0 includes 4 different models of varying sizes:
• Dense Models: 2B and 8B parameter models, trained on 12 trillion tokens in total.
• Mixture-of-Expert (MoE) Models: Sparse 1B and 3B MoE models, with 400M and 800M
activated parameters respectively, trained on 10 trillion tokens in total.
Accordingly, these models provide a range of options with different compute requirements to choose
from, with appropriate trade-offs with their performance on downstream tasks. At each scale, we
release a base model — checkpoints of models after pretraining, as well as instruct checkpoints —
models finetuned for dialogue, instruction-following, helpfulness, and safety. The base models are
trained from scratch with a two-stage training procedure. In stage 1, our dense and MoE models are
trained on 10 trillion and 8 trillion tokens, respectively. Stage 1 training data consists of unstructured
multilingual language data from diverse sources across academia, the internet, enterprise (e.g.,
financial, legal), and code, including publicly available datasets with permissive licenses. In stage 2,
we train on a mixture of 2 trillion tokens of data. Some of the data sources for stage 2 are the same as
the stage 1 data sources, mixed with a small amount of high-quality open-source and synthetic corpora
with permissive licenses. The data mixtures are derived through a data mixture search focusing
on robustness across different domains and tasks. The instruct models are derived by supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) of the pre-trained checkpoints, followed by model alignment using reinforcement
learning (PPO, BRAIn (Pandey et al., 2024)). We find that both SFT and PPO/BRAIn are important
for improved performance on downstream automatic evaluations, including better chat capabilities.
2

IBM
Granite Language Models
Additionally, the models were trained with techniques that leverage different methods found in the
existing literature: µP (Yang & Hu, 2020; Yang et al., 2022; 2023) allowed for hyperparameter
transfer after a hyperparameter search on smaller models, and Power scheduler (Shen et al., 2024c)
allowed for learning rate transfer across batch size and total number of training tokens. For our MoE
models, we used a dropless MoE (Gale et al., 2023) approach for better model performance using the
ScatterMoE (Tan et al., 2024) implementation.
Experiment results show that our Granite 3.0 models outperform models of similar parameter sizes
on many benchmarks, demonstrating strong performance in knowledge, reasoning, function calling,
multilingual, code support, as well as enterprise tasks like cybersecurity and retrieval augmented
generation (RAG). Figure 3 shows that our Granite-3.0-8B models consistently outperform Llama-
3.1-8B and Mistral-7B on various domains. The key advantages of Granite 3.0 models are:
• Lightweight: Our largest dense model has 8 billion parameters, and our smallest MoE
model has an activated parameter count of 400 million, enabling hosting, or even fine-tuning,
on more limited compute resources.
• Robust Models with Permissive License: Combined with excellent performance across
various benchmarks, our Granite 3.0 models provide a great foundation for enterprise
customization. All our models, including instruct variants, use an Apache 2.0 license,
allowing for more consumer and enterprise usage flexibility over the more restrictive licenses
of other available models in the same class.
• Trustworthy Enterprise-Grade LLM: All our models are trained on license-permissible
data collected following IBM’s AI Ethics principles1 for trustworthy enterprise usage. We
describe in great detail the sources of our data, data processing pipeline, and data mixture
search to strengthen trust in our models for mission-critical and regulated applications.
We describe the model architecture and background on MoE models in Section 2. Then, we describe
our data collection, filtering, and preprocessing pipeline in Section 3. We then go into detail about our
data mixture and hyperparameter search for pretraining in Section 4, followed by our post-training
methodology in Section 5, and our compute infrastructure in Section 6. Section 7 describes the
results of our comprehensive evaluation of the trained models, including a comparison with other
open-source LLMs. Finally, Section 8 discusses the social harms and risks of this project.
2
MODEL ARCHITECTURE
The Granite 3.0 language models are based on two architectures: a decoder-only dense transformer
and a decoder-only sparse Mixture-of-Expert (MoE) transformer.
Table 1: Hyperparameters for Granite 3.0 models.
Model
2B
8B
1B-A400M
3B-A800M
Embedding size
2048
4096
1024
1536
Number of layers
40
40
24
32
Attention head size
64
128
64
64
Number of attention heads
32
32
16
24
Number of KV heads
8
8
8
8
MLP hidden size
8192
12800
512
512
MLP activation
SwiGLU
SwiGLU
SwiGLU
SwiGLU
Number of Experts
–
–
32
40
MoE TopK
–
–
8
8
Initialization std
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Sequence Length
4096
4096
4096
4096
Position Embedding
RoPE
RoPE
RoPE
RoPE
#Parameters
2.5B
8.1B
1.3B
3.3B
#Active Parameters
2.5B
8.1B
400M
800M
#Training tokens
12T
12T
10T
10T
1https://www.ibm.com/impact/ai-ethics
3

IBM
Granite Language Models
2.1
DENSE MODELS
Granite 3.0 2B and 8B dense models share a similar architecture as popular language models like
Llama and our previous Granite Code models Mishra et al. (2024), ensuring strong compatibility
with open-source inference and fine-tuning pipelines. We use Grouped Query Attention (GQA;
Ainslie et al. 2023) with 8 key-value heads to get a good balance between memory cost and model
performance, and Rotary Position Embedding (RoPE; Su et al. 2024) to model the relative position
between tokens. For the MLP layers, Granite 3.0 Dense models use SwiGLU as the activation
function. Before each MLP and attention layer, we use RMSNorm to normalize the layer’s input. We
also share parameters between the input embedding and the output linear transform. This reduces
the size of the model, and we have observed that the tying of these embeddings have zero, or even a
positive impact on model performance.
2.2
MIXTURE-OF-EXPERT MODELS
Granite 3.0 1B and 3B MoE models use similar architecture as Granite Dense models, with the
MLP layers substituted with MoE layers. A Mixture of Experts (MoE) layer comprises N modules
f1, . . . , fN and a router g(e | x). Given an input x to the MoE layer, the router predicts a probability
distribution over the N modules. Of these, we select the top k experts. When k < N, we are using a
Sparse Mixture of Experts (SMoE; Shazeer et al. 2017). For this series of Granite MoE models, we
use a linear layer to model the router:
s = Wrouterx,
(1)
g(e | x) =

softmax (Topk (s))i ,
si ∈Topk (s)
0,
si /∈Topk (s)
(2)
where Wrouter is the expert embedding matrix of shape (N, Demb), and Topk is the operator that
selects the top k logits from s. The final output of the SMoE is then given by
y =
N
X
e=1
g(e | x) · fe(x)
(3)
When g(e | x) = 0, fe(x) will not need to be evaluated, thus reducing computation cost during
training and inference. The key designs of the Granite MoE models are summarized below:
Dropless Token Routing.
Since each token selects experts independently, some experts could
receive more tokens than others. In previous MoE models, like Switch Transformer (Fedus et al.,
2022) and Deepseek-V2 (Liu et al., 2024a), a capacity cap is set for each expert or device, and the
extra tokens that exceed the cap are dropped. As observed in Gale et al. (2023), this cap negatively
affects the model training stability and loss. In our training, we use ScatterMoE (Tan et al., 2024), a
dropless MoE implementation, to avoid token dropping and improve training efficiency.
Fine-grained Experts.
Recent studies (Krajewski et al., 2024; Dai et al., 2024) suggest that setting
the size of experts in MoE to mirror the feed-forward layer is not optimal. Instead, increasing the
expert granularity, number of experts, and number of activated experts could increase the possible
combinations of experts and result in better model performance. Following these observations, we use
fine-grained experts and a larger number of activated experts in Granite 3.0 MoE models. Specifically,
we use a top-k of 8 out of 32 and 40 experts respectively for the 1B and 3B MoE models.
Load Balancing Loss.
To avoid routing tokens repeatedly to the same expert and wasting the extra
capacity in other experts, we use the frequency-based auxiliary loss introduced in Fedus et al. (2022)
Lb = N
N
X
i=1
fiPi
(4)
where N is the number of experts, fi is the fraction of tokens dispatched to expert i, and Pi is the
fraction of the router probability allocated for expert i. Intuitively, this loss penalises over-usage of
4

IBM
Granite Language Models
experts, thus ‘balancing’ the load. To improve the training stability, we also use the router z-loss
introduced in Zoph et al. (2022):
Lz = 1
B
B
X
i=1

log
N
X
j=1
exp(xi
j)


2
(5)
where B is the number of tokens, x is the logits given by router. This loss penalises logits of the
router when it has extreme values, allowing the router to adapt better during training in order to better
assign experts. The final loss is the weighted sum of language model loss and two auxiliary losses.
3
TRAINING DATA
Granite 3.0 language models are trained using data from various sources such as unstructured natural
language text and code data from the Web curated by IBM, a collection of synthetic datasets generated
by IBM, and publicly available high-quality datasets with permissible licenses. For governance, all
our data undergoes a data clearance process subject to technical, business, and governance review.
This comprehensive process captures critical information about the data, including but not limited to
their content description, ownership, intended use, data classification, licensing information, usage
restrictions, how the data will be acquired, as well as an assessment of sensitive information (i.e,
personal information). For code, we annotate each code file with license information associated with
the respective repository, found via Github APIs and only keep files with permissive licenses for
model training. In addition, we also filter out all data obtained from sources that match URLs in
IBM’s URLs blocking-list. Below, we provide a brief overview about our data processing steps and
refer to the Appendix B.1 for details on individual datasets used in different stages of model training.
3.1
CURATED WEB DATA
We curate a massive collection of unstructured data from the Web, obtained from academic, enterprise
(e.g., financial, legal, biomedical), code, and other publicly available sources, e.g., open-source
datasets like FineWeb (Penedo et al., 2023), DCLM (Li et al., 2024a) for language and Github Code
Clean2, StarCoderdata3 for code domain. To ensure the quality of our curated web data, we have
developed a comprehensive data preprocessing procedure, as follows.
Text Extraction.
Text extraction is the first step in the processing of unstructured data crawled
from web, and is used to extract text from various documents into a standardized format for further
processing. After text extraction, we adopt fasText 4 for language identification at a document level
to detect the dominant language. With language identification, we specifically select documents
annotated with 12 languages namely English, German, Spanish, French, Japanese, Portuguese, Arabic,
Czech, Italian, Korean, Dutch, or Chinese as the dominant language. While our training data consists
of primarily-English data, we utilize high-quality documents from these other eleven languages to
improve multilinguality of Granite 3.0 models.
Deduplication.
Deduplication aims to identify and remove duplicate documents to improve overall
quality of a dataset. We adopt an aggressive deduplication strategy including both exact and fuzzy
deduplication to remove documents having (near) identical content. For exact deduplication, we first
compute SHA256 hash on the document content and remove records having identical hashes. Then,
we follow a two-step fuzzy deduplication strategy: (1) computing MinHashes of all the documents
and then utilize Locally Sensitive Hashing (LSH) to group them based on their MinHash fingerprints,
and (2) measuring Jaccard similarity between each pair of documents in the same bucket to annotate
documents except one as duplicates based on a similarity threshold. We apply this near-deduplication
process to both language and code data to enhance the richness and diversity of the training dataset.
2https://huggingface.co/datasets/codeparrot/github-code-clean
3https://huggingface.co/datasets/bigcode/starcoderdata
4https://huggingface.co/facebook/fasttext-language-identification
5

IBM
Granite Language Models
HAP and Malware Filtering.
To reduce the likelihood of generating hateful, abusive, or profane
(HAP) language from the models, we make diligent efforts to filter HAP content from our training set.
We compute HAP scores based on a HAP detector trained by IBM 5 at the sentence level and filter
out documents which exceeds a certain threshold. For code documents, we first create a dictionary of
HAP keywords and then annotate each document with the number of occurrences of such keywords
in the content including comments. We filter out documents which exceeds the HAP threshold,
computed based on a distributional analysis as well as manual inspection of code files. Please refer to
Mishra et al. (2024) for more details on the processing of code data. We also scan our datasets using
ClamAV6 to identify and remove instances of malware, especially in the source codes.
Document Quality Filtering.
Quality annotation aims to identify documents with low linguistic
value using both heuristics and a classifier. Specifically, we follow Gopher quality filtering crite-
ria (Rae et al., 2021) to remove low quality documents that contain for example bullet points ratio of
greater than 90%, ellipsis line ratio of greater than 30% and symbol to word ratio of greater than 10%,
etc. Besides heuristics, we also adopt a classifier-based filtering that assigns a perplexity score using
the KenLM linear classifier 7, pre-trained on a small collection of known high quality documents
(e.g., Wikipedia articles). For any document, the KenLM linear classifier provides a score of the
document’s similarity to a training corpus, indicating overall quality for model training.
We also apply several heuristics to filter out lower-quality code (Mishra et al., 2024): (1) remove files
with fewer than 25% alphabetic characters, (2) filter out files where the string “<?xml version=”
appears within the first 100 characters, (3) for HTML files, only keep files where the visible text
makes up at least 20% of the HTML code and has a minimum length of 100 characters, (4) for JSON
and YAML files, only keep files that have a character count ranging from 50 to 5000 characters.
3.2
SYNTHETIC DATA
Existing permissive datasets are becoming increasingly inadequate for training models with specific
capabilities, e.g., coding, reasoning, and safety etc during post-training. While collecting high-quality
data from humans is a potential solution for this, it is a time-consuming and costly endeavor. To
address this challenge, we conduct an in-depth exploration of synthetic data generation (SDG) as
an alternative for Granite models. Recently, the introduction of synthetic data pipelines such as,
Self-Instruct (Wang et al., 2023), Evol-Instruct (Xu et al., 2023), and MagPie (Xu et al., 2024)
leveraged ways to synthetically produce datasets nearly as comprehensive, competitive, and diverse
as those created by humans. Inspired by these recent methods, our synthetic datasets are composed
of input-output pairs, cover single and multi-turn scenarios, and target a generic or specific nature. In
this section, we provide an overview about the synthetic datasets, what data domains they contribute
to, and how we filter them for effective post-training of our models.
Generic Instruction Data.
We build generic instruction data in form of instruction-response pairs
primarily using Evol-Instruct (Xu et al., 2023) and MagPie (Xu et al., 2024) methods. Specifically
Evol-Instruct takes an initial seed of instruction data to generate improved complex versions of them
by randomly selecting in-depth or in-breadth evolving prompt templates. We verify the quality of
evolved instructions through a set of heuristics (e.g., character length, word count, seed instruction
leakage) and exclude instructions that do not pass this quality verification from the final dataset.
We repeat this evolution 5 times, and at each iteration, a mix of either original seed instructions or
evolved instructions (that passed the quality check) are used as input for the following iteration. A
list of synthetic datasets generated using Evol-Instruct can be found in Appendix B.2.
Unlike Evol-Instruct, MagPie generates high-quality instruction data without relying on prompt
engineering or seed questions. Instead, it directly constructs instruction data by prompting a LLM with
a pre-query template for sampling instructions. Following (Xu et al., 2024), we use 12 combinations
of temperature and top-p parameters by prompting a couple of teacher models with their respective
pre-queries followed by greedy sampling to generate the corresponding responses. Our final unfiltered
samples target varied between 5M and 10M depending on the LLM used for generation. In addition,
we also extend filtered versions of our single-turn datasets to create multi-turn datasets to enhance
5https://huggingface.co/collections/ibm-granite/granite-guardian-66db06b1202a56cf7b079562
6https://www.clamav.net/
7https://huggingface.co/edugp/kenlm
6

IBM
Granite Language Models
chat capabilities. We only use open-source teacher models with a non-restrictive license to generate
instructions and their respective responses. A list of synthetic datasets generated using Evol-Instruct
and MagPie can be found in Appendix B.2.
Code.
As demand for software development surges, it is more critical than ever to increase software
development productivity, and LLMs provide promising path for augmenting human programmers.
To improve coding capabilities of Granite 3.0 models, we focus on generating high quality synthetic
code data and creating quality filters to remove bad samples from our training data. Specifically,
inspired by Starcoder2-Instruct8, we extend the OSS self-instruct pipeline to 6 coding languages:
JavaScript, TypeScript, C, C++, Go, and Python, and use filtered pretraining data as the seed data
with granite-34b-code-instruct as the teacher model for generating instruction-response pairs.
We generate 235,000 samples with this method, which serves as one of the major code generation
dataset in our supervised finetuning. Beyond code generation, we also generate samples to cover
tasks like code explanation, docstring, and pseudocode generation by using a generate, backtranslate,
and filter process, as in (Dubey et al., 2024). Specifically, we prompt a teacher model to generate
code explanation, docstring, and pseudocode from the seed functions. These tasks are intentionally
grouped together so the model’s reasoning can improve with the combination of tasks. For filtering,
we prompt the model to grade the original seed function against the synthetic code for both fidelity
and complexity, and we keep samples that only pass a predefined threshold. We also adopt a similar
pipeline for generation synthetic data for tasks like unit test generation and code debugging, helping
our models to perform better on code fixing and explanation.
We also leverage SDG to collect multi-turn data, by incorporating execution output as feedback along
with human feedback. Following (Zheng et al., 2024), we generate 50k multi-turn dialogues with
code execution and synthetic code reviews. We identify python samples via model classification
and heuristics in two open source datasets, namely Glaive Code Assistant 9 and Code Instructions
Alpaca 10. We filter the instructions by complexity using LLMaJ with a complexity scale of 1-5.
We then use the instruction from the filtered dataset as the initial prompt in an mulit-turn agentic
pipeline that consists of agents for writing, executing and reviewing code built with the AutoGen
framework. Dialogues that produce trajectories with executable code with passing unit tests after a
round of synthetic code review and update are included in the final dataset.
Reasoning.
Reasoning with LLMs has been in the forefront (Plaat et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024a),
given both the evolution of benchmarks and the inconclusive discussions around the reasoning abilities
of LLMs (Kojima et al., 2023; Mirzadeh et al., 2024). However, the progress with chain-of-thought
and evolution of Agentic behaviors has shifted focus towards innovative mechanisms to generate
reasoning and planning traces with human validation of each step (et al., 2024; Lightman et al., 2023).
We employ two main techniques for generating synthetic reasoning data:
• Code-Assisted Synthetic Data Generation: We use code-assisted SDG for primarily algorithmic
tasks (Li et al., 2023b). Within each reasoning category, we use domain-specific seed prompts
and seed data to introduce diversity. Python code execution is used both to generate and validate
chain-of-thought and the final answer for various reasoning tasks.
• Knowledge-based Data Generation:
We utilize multiple knowledge graphs such as
ATOMIC (Hwang et al., 2021) and Wikidata (Vrandeˇci´c & Kr¨otzsch, 2014) to generate multi-hop
reasoning data with the chain-of-thought that includes commonsense and encyclopedia knowledge.
The initial knowledge graph seed structures are a combination of template-based and random-walk-
based techniques, enabling the grounding of the reasoning traces being generated. Grounding helps
in eliminating incorrect reasoning traces with both right and wrong final answers.
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG)
RAG is widely recognized as a promising approach
to address common challenges in large language models, such as factual inaccuracies, outdated
knowledge, and limitations in domain-specific expertise (Chen et al., 2024a). To generate synthetic
data for improving RAG capabilities, following (Lee et al., 2024b), we first input a document and
prompt an LLM to generate a user question. These questions span various types commonly found
8https://huggingface.co/blog/sc2-instruct
9https://huggingface.co/datasets/glaiveai/glaive-code-assistant-v3
10https://huggingface.co/datasets/TokenBender/code instructions 122k alpaca style
7

IBM
Granite Language Models
in information-seeking tasks, and to ensure that the generated questions align with the designated
question types, we incorporate question-type-specific CoT prompts, to guide the language model
in reasoning through the grounding document (Lee et al., 2024b). We then employ a retriever
(ELSER with sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2 sentence embeddings) to dynamically
select the top-k relevant passages from a pre-constructed document index, extending the user questions
generated in the first step into multi-turn, multi-document grounded conversations. The retrieved
passages, along with the query, are provided to the LLM, which is then prompted to generate a
response. For subsequent turns, we first prompt the LLM to generate a query given dialog history and
retrieved passages and then generate the answer as described above. Furthermore, an LLM-as-a-Judge
module is used to filter out dialogues with incorrect responses by evaluating all context-response
pairs within each dialogue. A larger language model assesses the accuracy of responses based on
dialogue history and the current query, and any dialogues containing incorrect question-answer pairs
are discarded. The multi-turn RAG data generation use two pblicly available datasets, QuAC (Choi
et al., 2018) and MultiDoc2Dial (Feng et al., 2021) as seed datasets.
Tool Use.
Tool (or function) calling is now considered one of the fundamental capabilities that
LLMs need to possess (Abdelaziz et al., 2024). In real-world applications, tool invocation can vary
in complexity, ranging from a single turn with a single tool (the simplest case) to more challenging
multi-turn interactions involving multiple sequential/nested tool calls. To train LLMs to utilize tools
requires a broad spectrum of training data covering different tool calling scopes.
In the recent past, there has been extensive research on transforming existing curated and manually
annotated datasets into a function calling format. While we leverage curated datasets such as API-
BLEND (Basu et al., 2024) and APIGen (Chen et al., 2024b), these datasets do not address the
evolving landscape of function calling benchmarks such as multi-turn tool calls, nested tool calls, and
tool relevance, etc. To address this, we extend existing SDG techniques to introduce new features of
function calling in LLMs. These pipelines also include generating data that calls APIs via different
programming languages (Guo et al., 2024).
Cybersecurity.
To create a comprehensive and diverse dataset capable of supporting instruction
tuning for various security-related tasks, we adopt the process in Levi et al. (2024), which consists of
two main steps, as follows. In the first generation step, we concentrate on producing high-quality
instructions derived from predefined schemas. These schemas are formulated through expert-driven
analysis of a diverse set of security datasets, examining the relationships between different entities
across datasets. This approach ensures that the instructions capture the nuances of various security
concepts and tasks. More specifically, each predefined schema has rules that dictate how the data
source should be processed into instructions, using parsers developed specifically for these security
data sources. This guarantees that the generated instructions focus on the important and unique
characteristics of the data source and are representative of real-world security scenarios. In the
second generation step, the diversity and complexity of the initial generated dataset is expanded by
employing a hybrid synthetic content-grounded data generation process. Specifically, we combine
Evol-Instruct (Xu et al., 2023) and Self-Instruct (Wang et al., 2022) alongside content-grounded
generation and evaluation pipelines. Additionally, we implement a routing mechanism between the
two generation methods to help reduce hallucinations.
This process leverages the initial set of instructions and data from the first generation step to generate
additional instructions that follow the established schemas while increasing the model’s overall
generalizability. By incorporating content-grounded synthetic data, we increase the diversity and
volume of the final dataset, ultimately leading to more robust and capable security models.
We leverage various publicly available security data sources, namely MITRE ATT&CK11, CWE12,
CVE13, CAPEC14, Security Wikipedia, Security interview Q&A, Threat reports, BRON (Hemberg
et al., 2020), SIEM alert rules, Sigma rules15, and Security Stack Exchange to generate both rules-
based and synthetic security instructions. Our final synthetic security dataset consists of various
11https://attack.mitre.org
12https://cwe.mitre.org
13https://cve.mitre.org
14https://capec.mitre.org
15https://github.com/SigmaHQ/sigma
8

IBM
Granite Language Models
instruction types, such as open/closed book question answering, yes/no questions, multi-choice
Q&A, CoT, logic validation, odd/leave one out multi-choice Q&A, question generation, query/rule
explanation and generation, TTP mapping, and others.
Multilingual.
To improve our model’s machine translation quality, we include parallel text from
datasets such as ParaCrawl 16, WikiMatrix (Schwenk et al., 2019a), and NLLB/CCMatrix (Schwenk
et al., 2019b). We apply extensive filtering based on language-specific heuristics and model-based
scoring to select only the highest-quality translation pairs from these datasets. For example, filtering
heuristics include steps such as removing samples that do not have a minimum amount of words or
where source and target have too many tokens in common, contain too many repeated characters
or tokens, or contain too many UTF-8 control characters. We also all apply more language-specific
filtering heuristics, e.g., for CJK languages or Arabic, we set a minimum threshold for the percent of
characters in the target language script. Model-based filtering comprises language id and calculating
alignment scores via a multilingual sentence embedding model (Artetxe & Schwenk, 2019).
Moreover, to enhance multilingual capabilities in multi-turn conversation scenarios, we translate
a subset of the publicly available Daring Anteater 17 SFT dataset into our targeted languages. For
translation, we use an existing LLM to translate each turn separately, but make sure that text formatting
and especially code blocks within each turn are preserved during translation.
Safety.
To safeguard our models, we leverage synthetic data as a powerful source for augmenting
AI safety training and aligning models in a targeted way. An AI risk taxonomy is a repository that
classifies and structures categories of risk. IBM Research uses its AI risk taxonomy as part of a
broader set of safety measures that apply to its development of foundation models. The taxonomy
helps to categorize known risks, which are used to generate synthetic data, for the purpose of aligning
language models. We leverage the following taxonomy for SDG that covers 7 high-level categories:
• Malicious Use: illegal activities, unethical or unsafe actions, and violence and extremism.
• System Risks: security and operational risks.
• Information Hazards: sensitive and personal information.
• Discrimination: a wide range of discrimination, including implicit and explicit bias.
• Societal Risks: disinformation, propaganda, and voter suppression.
• Human-Chatbot Interactions: mental health, child harm, and self-harm.
• Multi-Modal Requests: various forms of undesirable requests related to multi-modal support.
Our safety taxonomy has been informed by internal research as well as opensource AI risk taxonomies
research conducted by MIT and MLCommons 18. A diverse set of people distributed across different
IBM locations worldwide with diverse expertise and socio-cultural background contributed quality
seeds to address inappropriate prompts. Additionally, research into adversarial attacks also informed
the seeds gathered to safeguard our model against jailbreaks and prompt injection attacks. Specifically,
our synthetic safety data includes prompt-response pairs across a broad range of scenarios, covering
direct requests across a safety taxonomy with direct questions, comparative questions, hypothetical
prompts, adversarial attacks, and multi-turn interactions designed to expose unsafe behavior. Once
generated, quality and consistency checks of the synthetic data are also applied which includes both
extensive automated and manual reviews. An iterative approach was also used to improve the safety
alignment data by analyzing the resulting model’s behavior and producing more synthetic data to
increase the safety coverage as needed.
Quality Filtering.
When using synthetic data, we run several stages of filtering over it, removing
samples that are very short, easy for a reference model, unclear instructions or duplicated samples. We
follow (Xu et al., 2024) and leverage (1) LLM-as-judge (Zheng et al., 2023) to determine the category,
quality, and difficulty of instructions, and (2) the computation of minimum neighbor distance in the
16http://paracrawl.eu
17https://huggingface.co/datasets/nvidia/Daring-Anteater
18https://mlcommons.org/
9

IBM
Granite Language Models
1.5%
1.5%
4.0%
4.5%
19.0%
69.5%
Stage 1 Mix
Technical
Math
Academic
Domain
Code
Web
(a)
45%
11%
10%
10%
10%
5%
5% 4%
Stage 2 Mix
Web
Domain
Code
Math
Instruction
Multilingual
Academic
Technical
(b)
Figure 4: Data mixture for pretraining stages. The percentage for individual datasets has been merged
into different categories. Best viewed in color.
embedding space to identify near duplicates (Douze et al., 2024). Our sample annotation pipeline uses
Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 19 as the reference model (judge) and consists of the following steps:
• Instructions Annotation: We annotate the generated instructions with category (creative writing,
advice seeking, planning, and math, etc), difficulty (‘very easy’, ‘easy’, ‘medium’, ‘hard’, or ‘very
hard’), and instruction quality (‘very poor’, ‘poor’, ‘average’, ‘good’, and ‘excellent’).
• Responses Annotation: We asses the quality of responses conditioned on their respective instruction
using an LLM as judge (in a scale of 1-5).
• Sample-level Annotation: Particularly important for multi-turn datasets, we prompt an LLM for
assessing overall quality of a conversation between a user and an assistant (including all turns).
• Duplicates Annotation: We measure the similarity using minimum neighbor distance in the
embedding space (Xu et al., 2024). For multi-turn data, however, we concatenate the inputs from all
turns and compute minimum neighbor distance in the embedding space using the full conversations.
4
PRE-TRAINING
Granite 3.0 language models are trained on 10T to 12T tokens of language and code data, sourced
from different domains. Data is tokenized via byte pair encoding (BPE, (Sennrich et al., 2015)),
employing the same tokenizer as StarCoder (Li et al., 2023d). In this section, we provide details on
our two stage training, data mixture and power scheduler used in pretraining the models.
4.1
DATA MIXTURE
Beyond training data quality, the data mixture is another important aspect of model performance. We
craft the pretraining data mixture with two goals: 1) maximize the model’s performance across a
diverse set of domains and tasks without bias toward a specific type of data or task; 2) leverage both
high-quality and medium-quality data for optimal performance. To achieve these two goals, we adopt
the 2-stage data mixture strategy used in MiniCPM (Hu et al., 2024) and JetMoE (Shen et al., 2024b).
In stage 1, we pre-train the model on a large quantity of medium-quality data to learn and memorize
the knowledge from diverse domains. In stage 2, we continue pre-training the model on a smaller set
of high-quality data mixed with medium-quality data to encourage the model to mimic the behavior
of high-quality data and improve the model’s performance on downstream tasks.
19https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3
10

IBM
Granite Language Models
4.1.1
STAGE 1 DATA MIXTURE
The stage 1 data mixture search focuses on achieving robust language model performance across
different domains Di. Inspired by distributionally robust language model (Oren et al., 2019) and
DoReMi (Xie et al., 2024), our target was to minimize the weighted sum of relative domain losses,
with respect to a baseline:
min
θ
L(θ, α) :=
|D|
X
i=1
αi ·
"
1
P
x∈Di |x|
X
x∈Di
(ℓθ(x) −ℓref,i(x))
#
(6)
where θ is the mixture percentage of pre-training data, ℓθ(x) is the negative log-likelihoods of the
proxy model for data mixture search, ℓref,i(x) is the reference model for domain Di, |x| is the number
of tokens in an example x, and α is the weights for different domains. Reference models are small
language models trained with in-domain data from Di. Our assumption here is that the loss reflects
the difficulty of the target domain. By subtracting the reference model loss, we normalize the proxy
model loss by removing the difficulty factor. This way, we can avoid forcing the model to learn
difficult domains even if the model cannot improve further in this domain (Oren et al., 2019).
In the data mixture search, we train thousands of small proxy models with randomly sampled data
mixtures to find the optimal data mixture. Each proxy model is a small language model with 10M
parameters trained on 15B tokens. The ratio of the number of tokens to parameters is approximately
the same as our 8B dense model. Oren et al. (2019) and Xie et al. (2024) suggest that the maximum
relative domain loss should be minimized to achieve a distributional robust language model. However,
in practice, we notice that some domains are more difficult to learn in this multi-domain learning
setting due to conflicts between domains or format mismatches. In other words, if we focus on
reducing the maximum relative domain loss, the performance of other domains will be sacrificed. To
account for that, we minimize the average relative domain loss:
min
θ
L(θ) :=
|D|
X
i=1
1
|D| ·
"
1
P
x∈Di |x|
X
x∈Di
(ℓθ(x) −ℓref,i(x))
#
(7)
After running many experiments, we select the proxy model with minimum L(θ) and use its data
mixture as our stage 1 data mixture. Figure 4(a) shows the data mixture of stage 1.
4.1.2
STAGE 2 DATA MIXTURE
The stage 2 data mixture search focuses on improving model performance on a diverse set of
downstream tasks from natural language, code, and math domains. Similar to the stage 1, we
maximize the weighted sum of performance on the three domains:
max
θ
L(θ, α) :=
|D|
X
i=1
αi ·
"
1
|Di|
X
t∈Di
Acct(θ)
#
(8)
where Acct is proxy model performance on the task t. We use the average across multiple tasks from
each domain as the targeted metric to avoid over-fitting on a specific task.
However, in stage 2, we cannot use the small proxy models for the mixture search, because most
downstream tasks require a model that is large enough to achieve meaningful performance. Thus, we
conduct the mixture search with our 2B dense model. Even with the 2B dense model, we still cannot
run thousands of experiments to find the optimal search. Instead, we run a few hundred experiments
with 30B tokens from a randomly sampled mixture and use linear regression to fit the correlation
between the data mixture and task performance. Figure 5 shows the correlation between the predicted
and ground-truth accuracy for different domains. We can see a strong correlation between the two
sets of values. Based on the linear regression results, we craft the final stage 2 mixture to achieve
robust performance across different domains. Figure 4(b) shows the data mixture of stage 2.
4.2
TRAINING HYPERPARAMETERS
In Shen et al. (2024c), we proposed a systematic way of doing a hyperparameter search on a small
scale and 0-shot transfer the hyperparameter to a large scale. The core part of this method is maximum
update parameterization and a power scheduler.
11

IBM
Granite Language Models
48.0%
49.0%
50.0%
51.0%
52.0%
48%
49%
50%
51%
52%
Natural Language
17%
19%
21%
23%
17%
19%
21%
23%
Code
16%
20%
24%
28%
16%
20%
24%
28%
Math
Figure 5: The predicted and ground-truth accuracy for different data mixture samples. The x-axis is
the ground truth accuracy, and the y-axis is the predicted accuracy.
Maximal Update Parameterization. (µP) (Yang & Hu, 2020; Yang et al., 2022; 2023) controls
initialization, layer-wise learning rates, and activation magnitudes to ensure analytically stable
training, independent of a model’s width and depth. In addition to improving training stability, µP
improves the transferability of training hyperparameters from small proxy models to large models, a
technique called µTransfer. The hyperparameter transferability of µP is theoretically justified and
empirically demonstrated for width (Yang et al., 2022) and depth (Yang et al., 2023).
Table 2: List of changes applied when using µP. mwidth is width multiplier, defined as dm/dbase, where dbase is
the embedding width, dm is the target model size.
Name
Function
Embedding multiplier
Multiply the embedding output with memb
Residual Multiplier
Multiply the output of each attention and MLP layer with mres
before adding to residual connection
Initialization std
Initialize internal weight matrices (excluding input and output
embedding) with standard deviation initstd/√mwidth
Learning rate scaling
Set learning rate of internal weight matrices to η/mwidth
Attention logit scaling
Divide attention logits by dhead
We follow the µP config used in CerebrasGPT (Dey et al., 2023) to study the transferability of batch
size and learning rate across different numbers of training tokens and model sizes. Table 2 lists the
µP changes we applied to model initialization, learning rate, and multipliers.
Power Scheduler. is a new learning rate schedule that includes a linear warmup, a slow power decay,
and a fast exponential decay:
Power (n) =





n
Nwarmup · ηmax
if n ≤Nwarmup
min
 ηmax, βanb
if Nwarmup < n ≤N −Ndecay
f(n, N, Ndecay) · βa (N −Ndecay)b
if N −Ndecay < n
(9)
where β is the batch size, n is the number of tokens already trained, a is the amplitude of the learning
rate, b is a power-law exponent for decaying the learning with respect to the number of trained tokens,
and ηmax is the learning rate upper bound that rejects very large learning. Shen et al. (2024c) shows
two benefits of a power scheduler: 1) it enables zero-shot transferability of learning rate between
different batch sizes and numbers of training tokens, such that we can use small batch size and number
of training tokens to search for optimal learning rate, then use it for large scale training runs; 2) it
doesn’t require a predefined number of training tokens or steps, such that we can start the training
and do early exit or add additional tokens to the training and still get optimally converged model.
Combining these two methods, we conducted the hyperparameter search on a very small scale (36M
parameters, up to 128B tokens) to get the optimal hyperparameters. We then zero-shot transferred
this set of hyperparameters to all of our model training. More details about the hyperparameter search
can be found in Shen et al. (2024c).
12

IBM
Granite Language Models
For all our models, we use AdamW optimizer (Diederik, 2014) with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.95 and weight
decay of 0.1 for training all our models. For the learning rate, we use the power scheduler with a = 4,
b = −0.51, and ηmax = 0.02, and an initial linear warmup step of 2500 iterations. We use a batch
size of 4M tokens during both stages of pretraining.
4.3
MODEL PARALLELISM
We use a combination of 3D parallelism (Tensor Parallelism (Shoeybi et al., 2020), Pipeline Paral-
lelism (Narayanan et al., 2021b) and Data Parallelism (Li et al., 2020)) for training all our models.
We use tensor parallelism to split the weight matrices and activations and pipeline parallelism to slice
the model along the layers. We put an equal compute load on each pipeline stage except the first
and last pipeline stages, which contain the embedding matrix and the LM head, respectively. The
2B dense model is trained with 256 GPUs using tensor parallel sharding on 2 GPUs, and the 8B
dense model is trained on 768 GPUs using 4x tensor parallelism and 4x pipeline parallelism. We
use the 1F1B (1-Forward 1-Backward) schedule (Narayanan et al., 2021a;b) for efficient pipeline
parallelism to reduce the memory consumption for the in-flight microbatches. The 1F1B schedule
makes the memory consumption proportional to the pipeline depth instead of the number of in-flight
microbatches, which can be quite large when training such models. We shard the optimizer on the
Data Parallel process group similar to ZeRO-1 (Rajbhandari et al., 2020) for reducing the optimizer
memory footprint during training. Because tensor parallelism is extremely latency sensitive and
blocking in nature, we only do tensor parallelism within a server node while pipeline parallelism and
data Parallelism can span across nodes. We only use data parallelism without any model parallelism
to train the MoE models. They are trained using 128 and 256 GPUs using ZeRO-1 sharding (Rajb-
handari et al., 2020) to shard the optimizer across multiple GPUs. To accelerate training, we use
FlashAttention 2 (Dao et al., 2022; Dao, 2023), the persistent layernorm kernel, Fused RMSNorm
kernel (depending on the model), and the Fused Adam kernel available in NVIDIA’s Apex library.
5
POST-TRAINING
We develop the post-training (instruct) variants of our Granite 3.0 models by further training the
pre-trained checkpoints, focusing on instruction-following capabilities and alignment with human
values. We employ a diverse set of techniques with a structured chat format, including curriculum-
based supervised finetuning, model alignment using proximal policy optimization (PPO), best-of-N
sampling, BRAIn (Pandey et al., 2024), and model merging.
5.1
STRUCTURED CHAT TEMPLATE
While a pre-trained model may generate reasonable responses to directives—or, instructions—a
standardized chat format is commonly used in post-training. A common format not only reinforces
the structure of query and response pairs used in the applications of instruct-styled models but also
allows for further control sequences to denote different actors within a single input provided to the
model, such as information from external systems. To support both human-AI and machine-AI
interactions with the instruction-following variants of Granite, we develop a structured interface
that enhances the model’s ability to follow directives as including follow ups. The structure is split
in multiple sections, or turns, where knowledge is commonly formatted and then aggregated for
the model. For basic uses, turns include sections for just the human and the model; however, for
enterprise uses, flexibility was added so that turns can include system information, external tools and
functions available, further context, and even other agents and their responses (see Table 3).
Additionally, we carefully study the impact of specific/control tokens used in the structure of the
prompt template, as shown in Table 4. Through ablations studies of different tokenizers, we find most
BPE tokenizers fail to create guaranteed boundary lines when simple separators such as a newline are
used. This not only makes masking during supervised finetuning unreliable but also leaks prompt
control se
