warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.19366
Type: PDF
Pattern: correlat\w*|benchmark|three\s+instruction|models (22 matches in 24991 chars)

--- Content ---

262:...LM Safety
Soyeon Park
Seogyeong Jeong
Sunwoo Kim
Alice Oh
KAIST
{soyeonp, sg.jeong28, sunwoo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr, alice.oh@kaist.edu
Abstract
Prior work has shown that internal harmfulness representations in large language
models vary across risk categories, while sharing a common general harm repre-
sentation component. This raises a question about the role of the category-specific
component beyond general harm representation in LLM safety. To ...
--
992:...with category residuals across 11 risk categories in 3
instruction-tuned LLMs, we find that whether category residuals encode harmful-
ness varies across categories, and that this category-wise pattern is similar across
models. Whether category residuals induce refusal also varies across categories,
but this category-wise pattern is more model-dependent. We also find that category
residuals increase LLMs’ downstream internal alignment with sh...
--
2806:...y-relevant behavior and downstream computation. Our contributions are threefold:
• We show that some category residuals carry harmfulness beyond category semantics, with a
category-wise pattern that is consistent across models (Section 3.1).
• We demonstrate that category residuals can induce refusal, with model-dependent strength
(Section 3.2).
• We find that category residuals usually increase downstream general harm alignment despite
being...
--
4202:...c component.
To establish these findings, we derive category residuals by removing general harmfulness from
category harmfulness, yielding directions orthogonal to general harm at each layer, and steer them
across three models and 11 CatQA categories [Bhardwaj et al., 2024]. Together, these findings
demonstrate that alongside shared general harm representation, more fine-grained category residuals
should also be considered to fully understand LLM safety. More broadly, our findings show that
even a direction orthogonal to a concept at one layer can contribute to the concept’s downstream
amplification.
2
Methods
2.1
Category Residual Construction
Models.
We study Gemma-2-9B-IT [Gemma Team et al., 2024], Llama-3-8B-Instruct [Grattafiori
et al., 2024], and Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct [Yang et al., 2024].
Prompt pair construction.
We construct prompt pairs consisting of one harmf...
--
10394:...iffer substantially across categories in whether steering them makes an otherwise
harmless instruction appear harmful (Figure 2, left). Hate/harassment/violence and adult content
produce the largest effects in all three models, while child abuse, physical harm, illegal activity, and
privacy violation show smaller positive effects. The remaining categories are weak or near baseline.
The category-wise ordering is strongly preserved across models: Spearman correlation ρ is 0.97 for
Gemma–Llama, 0.92 for Gemma–Qwen, and 0.89 for Llama–Qwen (n = 11 categories). Although
the models use different steering strengths (see Figure 2 caption), category residuals show a repro-
ducible category...
--
[14 more matches not shown]
